# Python Dependencies

## How-to

1. Edit `requirements.in` (note `.in`, not `.txt`) to add your application-specific dependencies.
2. Create the `.txt` versions of the `requirements` files by running:

   ```text
   python run.py deps compile
   ```

3. Update your local dev environment by running:

   ```text
   uv pip sync requirements-dev.txt
   ```

4. Commit and push the changed `requirements` files to Git.

## In more detail

The dependencies are split up into:

- `requirements.in`: Your application-specific top-level dependencies. This is usually the only file you should edit.
- `requirements-core.in`: Dependencies required by xlwings Server.
- `requirements-dev.in`: Additional dependencies only required during development.

Each `.in` file has an autogenerated `.txt` file, these are the lock files where all dependencies incl. sub-dependencies are pinned.

Add your own dependencies to `requirements.in` (again, note the `.in`, not `.txt`). If you have a development dependency, add it to `requirements-dev.in` instead. If you need to pin a dependency to a certain version, you also do that in the `.in` version of your requirements file.

After changing any dependencies via `.in` file, you need to run `python run.py deps compile`, which uses [uv](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) under the hood.

Here's an example of `requirements.in`:

```
-r requirements-core.txt  # Don't delete this line
pandas
numpy==1.26.4
```

When you first clone xlwings Server, there will be a few dependencies in `requirements.in`. They are there to make the examples work out of the box, but you should replace them with your own top-level dependencies.

## Conda environments

If you'd like to use a Conda env because e.g., you have dependencies that are only available via Conda, do the following:

1. Create a new Conda env. Make sure to replce `myenv` with the desired name of your environment:

   ```text
   conda create -n myenv python=3.12 -y
   ```

2. Activate the Conda env:

   ```text
   conda activate myenv
   ```

3. Install the `uv` package manager:

   ```text
   pip install uv
   ```

4. Install `requirements-dev.txt` (for development) or `requirements.txt` otherwise:

   ```text
   uv pip sync requirements-dev.txt
   ```

5. Install conda dependencies:

   ```text
   conda install blas
   ```

6. Export the environment into `environment.yml` (call it `environment-dev.yml` if this is a development environment):

   ```text
   conda env export > environment.yml
   ```

Commit `environment.yml` to Git. You can now use it to recreate this specific Conda environment whenever you need it via `conda env create -f environment.yml`.
